a different situation had taken place. When I came
back immediately after 1951, I had an offer to come
as visiting professor to University of North
Carolina in Raleigh, as well as Chapel Hill. And I
had an offer to maybe take over the program there in
the School of Architecture, but they had already a
very, very good planning program in Chapel Hill
with Jack Parker. And so I went back and forth, but
while I was there, I met the Vice Chancellor of
North Carolina, who had just become the
Chancellor of the University of Texas. So when I
came back here, he came back, and we had already a
working relationship, and he supported me quite
vociferously, sending me to the various meetings
on the Southern Regional Education Board, which
we tried to join, but there was an enormous
opposition. Texas has a certain aversion to join
other regions. And so Wilson Logan or Logan
Wilson, could not do anything. But he set up two
committees, one committee under his own
guidance, you may say, consisting of various
people from all involved, law, for instance, or
engineering, or whatever, and another one, a
working committee, the Graduate Studies
Committee, also consisting of the chairman of
various groups and professors in sociology and
economics, engineering and so forth. Mr.
Gleuner, for instance, Dr. Gleuner, who is now the
Dean of College of Engineering. How does he spell
his name? Gleuner, G-L-O-Y-N-E, Gleuner. And
they had all established planning in their
departments, which is, of course, a very good
thing. But it didn't work out in our case. In fact,
reasonable planning was resented by people in
economics, And as a side
remark, I just want to mention that at that time,
probably already, the ideas of the LBJ, the
Institute of Public Affairs, was going around,
but of course nobody could talk about these
things, so we were still encouraged to go on our
way, but the administration's heart was no longer
in it. And so when we finally, in 1959, got the
official permission of the coordinating board.
By that time, they all had left and went their own
way. And it was a pretty hard struggle from then on.
So we had a small program within architecture. And
it was a period of struggle. But we had a small
number of people who went through this. By that
time, I had reached retirement age. we had new
people coming in and from then on the whole thing
took off. So I just want to talk up to that point.
Actually, in connection with a German film on the
redevelopment of the Ruhr, area in Western
Germany, along the Rhine and the Ruhr, a film was
made, which I produced here several times. And in
that connection, a discussion took place in New
York, where they talked about the difficulties
which They're quite obvious in my efforts here,
but they're also quite universal over the United
States. And I just wanted to quote something here
because it has to do with an understanding of the
difficulties elsewhere, I imagine. But anyway,
in this discussion in New York, a speaker
commented on why Americans have a bias toward
planning. The speaker made much of the
impossibility of transferring cultural values
from Europe to the United States. The speaker, a
woman, pointed out that Americans have an
anti-historical bias in the total culture,
irrespective of where they come from originally.
That prevents them from implementing any
planning program, especially in the
northeastern cities of the United States. In
fact, In New York, Boston, and so on, European
principles of town planning cannot be applied at
all, either physically or administratively.
Well, I just want to put that in because that
explains a lot of the difficulties, you know,
which are part of the, you may say, the sentiment,
you know, the general sentiment. So when I say I had
a struggle, it is really nothing unusual. No, not
at all. Except I didn't know all these things.
All right. But there was a lot of European
influence, nevertheless. Oh, yes. Particularly
eastern cities, in terms of their early planning
programs. Not so much in the Middle West or the Far
West, because we were too isolated from Europe.
But it was much easier for a person living in Boston
or New York to get to Europe than it was for him to get
to Texas or California, even. Well, Bob, you're
absolutely right. Because when I mentioned at the
beginning of our interview the Rockefeller
grant, which I received, and the $80,000 each
given to Harvard, MIT, and Columbia University,
what they do with the money. Columbia University
got Raymond Unwin from England.
MIT got
Father and Son, the Englishman, who was chairman
of the department for quite a while.
We'll fill that in later. Yeah, on the
conscription. Adams, Mr. Adams. Oh, yes, yes.
Frederick Adams. Frederick, our father. with a
regional plan, New York, you know, and his son, who
became chairman of MIT, of MIT, the planning
program. So, I mean, this illustrates that the
European influence was very strong up to that
point, and then it sort of broke down and away from
it. But during the 1910s and 1920s, it was
fantastic, the European influence, especially
French, and to some degree German, through the
districting or zoning in German cities. But that
didn't really transmit very much to the Middle
West or West. Well, it took actually... Except for
people like you. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. That's
incidental. No, it really is evident in Texas. You
know, Colonel Kessler. I have written that all
down because it is... George Kessler? Was it
George Kessler? From Kansas City? Yes, of course.
He
was the one that did the incredible park system for
Kansas City and worked in Dallas and Fort Worth. As
well as El Paso. But he was educated in Germany.
We're not quite sure if he was born in Germany and
raised in Dallas, and then his mother took him back
to Germany for his education later on. But we're
not quite sure if he was born in Germany or not. Bob,
in 1965, Martha
and I were asked to write a... summarize what we
knew about the history of planning in Texas up to
that time. So that was done for the League of Women
Voters of Texas. And it may have some pertinent
stuff in there. You were just talking about
Kessler and... Of course, we know that he worked in
Fort Worth, in Dallas, and I believe also in El
Paso. Yes. He did a plan in 1925 in El Paso. Yes. And
this is here sort of a rundown of these various
efforts, which, of course, is no longer up to date.
It is only... taking in the area prior to the
development as we know it now. Why is it that the
University of Texas planning program has never
achieved separate departmental status?
They have their own faculty, they control their
own budget why is it that they don't have you know a
clear departmental status within the university
structure well bob this is a very complex
situation the university of texas of course now
it's a systems university but has a very large
uh... budgetary setup i mean a very large
commitment to spend their monies and uh... they
don't like to deal with small entities in other
words uh... let's say the college of arts and
sciences is an enormous thing that was broken down
into colleges into different colleges to take the
sciences and the arts Separately. Now, the School
of Architecture was a school within the College of
Engineering. It was a department, actually,
together with the other eight or ten or twelve
departments. And as such, they took an
administrative unit through the dean to the
president. And of course the administration is
not too much impressed by small units which have
really not much of a backing, financial backing,
such as law or medicine or even economics or
business administration, you know. And that has
been actually the main reason. So the struggle we
had was constantly to get our share within a larger
budget. And maybe that isn't such a bad idea
because you really have to exert yourself. You
have to show. Now, the whole system is based on
student enrollment and graduate numbers. And
since our program has never been very large, it
didn't seem to make too much sense to the
administration. And in addition to this, the
whole field of planning, as defined by the
American Institute of Planners at the time,
through their accrediting board, became very,
very stringent in their requirements, which
today is no longer the case. And once we had
fulfilled one set of requirements, they had added
others. And as a result, we never quite made it
until... We got Mr. Cole, who had very good input in
Washington, having been with the Transportation
Administration. And through his effort, he had
received pretty large research grants prior to
coming. Afterwards, it was no longer the case to
such an extent. So by looking at it this way, they
felt that there was really a lot of pressure from
the outside, because the Americans are planners.
The Texas chapter made numerous efforts. We
brought in just about everybody from
Mosseen, who was president of AIP, to Paul
Oppermann, who was president of MIT, to Cusick,
who was president of AIP. We had all these people
here. They made all efforts, but to no avail. And so
it was one of these things. And of course, today, in
retrospect, the situation is different again. so
that, as is the case probably in any discipline,
changes take place and they make past efforts in
retrospect seem rather futile.
In connection with this, we made enormous efforts
not only to bring the various succeeding
presidents of national AIP to Austin to
participate in conferences and talk to the
chancellor, president, and the dean of officials
and so forth. But we also attempted to get monies
from the Ford Foundation, which gave enormous
amounts of money to any number of universities to
set up departments, independent departments
with their own budgets.
And so to think in terms of the millions, scores of
millions of dollars that went into University of
Wisconsin or, of course, Harvard, MIT, Columbia,
Tennessee, you name it. I mean, any number of
places didn't seem to make too much difference to
our administration. I personally had the
permission of the then Vice President Ransom to
talk to people at the... Ford Foundation in New
York, and that didn't help either much, because
there were too many competing areas on this campus
here that wanted money from the Ford Foundation,
that we were just sort of a nuisance in this whole
effort. So I went and got monies from the
coordinating board for Texas colleges. What was
it, under Title I of the Education Act? and also
through my activities with the Urban Planning
Assistance Program, 701, where we could channel
monies to research work and so forth.
When I was serving as a consultant to the United
States High Commissioner for Germany, I received
a note from the organizer of the first post-World
War II planning exhibit and conference where the
American exhibit was. That was in May or June 1950.
The
conference was supposed to be in the fall in
Amsterdam. But there wasn't anything. It
happened to fall between two chairs, namely the
chair of Mr. Adams who was president of AAP at MIT,
and Mr. Paul Oppermann, who has been the new
president of AAP, who was in San Francisco at that
time. Between the two, nothing had happened. So I
wrote a blistering
critique about this whole thing that among all the
nations in the world, the United States was not
represented. And the High Commissioner for
Germany said, we have to get something there. Why
don't you build something? I said, that's
impossible. It takes much more. You have to have a
story and so forth. So we said, okay, we have to have
something. So I got the standard equipment on
housing and planning, which every embassy has,
which consists of three filing cabinets, steel
filing cabinets, and a table full of planning
literature, which was the representation of the
United States, while London had a huge model about
12 feet high with all the burning things to be
reconstructed over London and, you know, that
style. So that same year, I had a call from when I
came back in 50 for a few months. I had a call from
Washington saying, well, when can you have that
exhibit ready? I said, what exhibit? Well, you
criticize that we didn't have an exhibit. Can you
build one now? I said, yes, of course. So here I was.
And within two months, I had to set up an exhibit of
American post-war planning efforts. So with the
stationery from the State Department in
Washington, I wrote to Mr. Bob Moses in New York, to
people in Seattle, to people in anywhere,
everywhere, big cities. And over the weekends, I
went to these cities and got all their material,
and we built here in Austin, Texas, School of
Architecture. We built that exhibit, 600 pounds
of it, and sent it over by airmail. And then I went
back to Germany, and it was in Hanover, and went
over the whole of Germany and England. so that is an
interesting thing I still have all that material
so one can see what we did if it's on loose or
whatever you know yeah